I have a model of a CPU, right?
And we are gonna import
memory from a separate file,
I'll show you the file in a second.
Actually let's go into the file.
This is a super simple memory.
All it says is, if I hover over,
you can see that this happens to be 100.
I just randomly assign numbers
to these instructions, but
these are just numbers, right?
And so basically, it says a 100, 5,
111, 3, 4, 1, and then 0, right?
And so to CPU that 100 means
load a constant into register0,
which means, read 5.
Again, the numbers are made up, right,
like just just kind of prove the point.
Different architectures basically have
different meanings for these numbers.
So this one loads 5, and
then it says Register1, load 3, and
then it says add Register 1 to Register0.
So now you should be ending up with
8 inside of Registers0, right?
So if I go and run this code,
so what you can see is that in
memory we have these numbers, right?
And these are the registers
that exist in the CPU.
I've kind of split them out for you here.
So you can see program counter
starts at 0, the R1 and R1 is,
everything's zeroed out
at the initial state.
And then it reads an instruction that
says load 5 into R0, so after this,
there is a 5 in Register1, load 3 into R1.
Now we have a 3 in the Register 1.
Then we'd say instruction to add
perform the odd operations of 3 and
5 becomes 8, and you can see that
there is now 8 inside of Register 0.
And then I just have a halt instruction
completely stop doing anything you're
finished, right?
Fundamentally, that's what a CPU is.
Now, it's kind of important to
understand the nuances of it all.
So let's build something more complicated.
The first thing that I wanted to show
you is, this isn't the real thing
because 3 and 5 are constants that
are encoded within the program, right?
And what this code really hasn't done is
it hasn't only shown you how to read or
write data into memory, right?
And so we're gonna build more complicated
versions of it in a second, but
I just wanted to show you
the basics of CPU, right?
So the CPU has these registers, these are,
you can think of them as local variables.
Flags, we'll talk about later.
Here's our program counter,
which is a special register that
automatically increments to read
the Nix instructions and stack pointer
which we're going to talk about later.
I pronounced the memory state, right,
you can see I log out some information so
that you can kind of see it and it
really is just a loop that runs forever.
And what the loop does is it says, grab me
the next instruction from a memory, right?
So take a look at the address of
the program counter, go fetch the data,
and increment the program counter, right?
And now we have a decode step,
so now we have this we go and
look like what instruction do we have?
Is it a HALT?
So I believe the first
instruction was load R3.
So it was load constant to R0,
right, was this one right here.
And what this instruction
really does is just says fine,
just take the program counter location
again and load it into Register 0, right?
And that's how we loaded
the information in.
And of course,
I have some logging information here
to kind of see what's going on.
But fundamentally, this is the operation
that was performed by the CPU, right?
You can see the same thing for
load constant R1.
It's the same exact thing, but
this time we're doing it R1.
There is a difference R0 is special,
and it has these things called flags.
Flags will make more sense
when we talk about jumps.
So just ignore them for a second.
And you can just see that all the CPU is
basically this huge decode thing that
kind of figures out like, okay,
so the instruction was whatever,
that means I have to perform
one of these many operations.
And these operations,
basically say how to fetch data how to
add data how to manipulate data etc.
The speed of the CPU,
we measure things in kind of gigahertz,
right, the frequency by
which we can process it.
The way to think about it is,
at the end of the day,
we kind of reached the limit
in terms of megahertz.
If you look at it through the history,
I remember when I was a kid my
first computer was at 86xD,
it was running at a whopping 5 megahertz
not gigahertz megahertz, okay?
And over time, I could watch like it
goes from 5 megahertz to 40 megahertz,
25 to 50, 100, and every time it
went up I was like this is amazing.
And every year the megahertz just
would go up, and up, and up and
then it finally hit about 2.5 to 4
gigahertz, and we've been stuck there for
last, I don't know, 10 to 15 years,
we haven't really moved, right?
So fundamentally,
we kind of reached the limit of how
fast we can move the electrons around.
And one way to think about it is, I'm
gonna get the math wrong, so I apologize.
One way to think about speed is how fast
can electron travel in a given time?
Actually, let me rephrase that just to
kind of blow your mind a little bit.
How fast do electrons move?
Anybody?
>> Speed of light?
>> Not even close.
[LAUGH] This is a trick question,
I'm so sorry.
Electrons have weight, and therefore,
sorry for going into physics here.
[LAUGH] Electrons have weight,
and because they have weight,
they can never approach
the speed of light.
Photons have no weight and they can go
speed of light, but electrons cannot.
Turns out electrons in your
devices go extremely slow
on the order of centimeters per second.
Let that sink in, centimeters per second.
So how is electricity instant?
Okay, the reason electricity is instant is
because electrons don't like each other.
And so when you push on this electron
here, it pushes on the next one, and
it pushes on the next one,
it pushes on the next one, right?
And the propagation of the pushing
is at the speed of light.
The electrons themselves are super slow.
So there's something
called an electron drift.
And that's what measures
the speed of the electrons.
And if you get the electrons going
any reasonable speed, running speed,
like for humans, how we would walk etc,
electrons tend to melt wires.
So the speed of electrons is extremely
slow, it's the propagation of the wave
that is speed of light,
not the electrons themselves.
Sorry for the digression,
let's go back to it.
So one way to think about speed is,
how far can light or
this propagation of travel in a second.
And so a nanosecond is this long, right,
in terms of how fast you can go places.
So nanoseconds, we're talking about,
if I remember my math correctly, and
somebody should double check me.
I believe nanoseconds equals gigahertz.
Is that right?
So gigahertz means a million flips
back and forth per second, right?
So a nanosecond would be one-millionth
of a second if I get this right.
Can you double check me?
>> Gigahertz is a billion.
>> Is it a billion?
>> Yeah.
>> In Gigahertz is a billion?
>> Okay, but
I believe a nanosecond is about this long
in terms of what light travels, right?
And I think a gigahertz is
a billion of hertz, right?
So that's what equals, okay?
So here's the problem.
That's a gigahertz,
if you move it down to 4 gigahertz, so
that's one quarter that's about this much,
that's about the size of a CPU, okay?
This is why we're not gonna go much
faster than what we currently are,
chips are about this big, right?
You can't go much faster,
you can't get into a situation where
you flip something on one side of
the chip, and there isn't enough time for
speed of light to get to the other side
of the chip to do something, right?
So this is the reason why
we're hitting this limit.
And the reason I'm telling you all this,
it's cuz I wanna convince you that,
in the future,
we're not gonna see 100 gigahertz CPUs.
It's just not gonna happen because there's
physical limitations that are preventing
this from happening.
Anyway, so getting back to this.
So what we've seen is that
the CPU speed has gone up.
The other thing we can do to make
the computer's faster or CPUs faster is,
we can be really clever about
doing multiple things at once.
So in the past, it took several
clock cycles to process a operation.
So like an operation like load
constantly to Register 0 it might have
taken multiple clock cycles.
So one clock cycles for
the CPU to decode what instruction says,
another clock cycle to go to the memory,
and so on and so forth, right?
And so CPUs got really good at
parallelizing things together.
So now what you can have is
that on any given one cycle,
you can actually have multiple
instructions getting processed by the CPU.
Now you can imagine that that creates
problems because instructions have
codependencies between themselves, right?
You can say, if you have Instruction A,
it might need data from Instruction B.
And so now you get to the world
of speculative execution.
And what speculative execution basically
says is that, let's say I come across
an if statement, I need to make
a decision, do I go this way or that way?
One way to do it is to say, well, let me
just stall the pipeline, meaning that,
let me just wait until the previous
instruction completes so
that I have the data to make
a decision about how to go next, right?
And you can imagine that, if statements
are pretty common, inside of CPUs, and
so, as a result,
you would stall the pipeline quite often.
And so
what modern CPUs do is they say, well,
how about we guess whether we go A or B.
Let's just make an educated guess.
So what they do is they keep statistics,
and they see like last time I was at this
branch I went that way, so let's just go
the same way as I did last time, okay?
And so that's called
speculative execution, and so
the CPU starts executing something
that may not be correct, right?
And so the CPU executes that, and
eventually the previous instruction
completes and says, yes,
the value is this, and
the guess you have made is correct.
And usually the answer is yes,
it's correct.
And the CPU can then take the data that it
computed and commit it into its official
registers and say, yep, that was correct,
and let's keep executing.
Sometimes the CPU gets this wrong, and
basically all the work that it has done
has to be thrown away, it cannot be
committed, it's the wrong thing.
And sometimes we get
bizarre bugs like this.
What is it called?
Scepter?
Where you speculatively execute and
read memory that doesn't belong to you,
and then you get to read memory
that might contain a private key or
something like that few years ago.
>> That bug blew up the Internet-
>> Yeah.
>> Four years ago.
>> Yeah, that by the globe and
they're few years ago, right?
>> Yeah
>> The hilarious
thing about the bug is that
it's working as intended.
Modern CPUs all have speculative
execution and speculative execution
means that at times the CPU can end up
executing stuff it's not supposed to.
The CPU is good about like not committing
it and so you don't get to see it, but
you can see a side effect of it.
And a side effect of it is that you can
see what got loaded into an L0 and
L1 cache.
And through that in direction it
is possible to figure out what
data was read in memory
that doesn't belong to you.
And that was a huge problem
that kind of blew up.
Anyways, I digress.
>> As someone said,
it was called zero-day specter.
>> Zero-day specter, yeah, yeah.
So that came on it.
So what I'm showing you here is all
the different tricks we have for
making CPUs go faster, right?
Trick 1 is make the clock go faster and
we have reached the limit.
Trick 2 is do more operations per clock.
In other words, parallelism.
And I'm gonna argue that
we've also reached the limit.
Modern CPUs can probably keep somewhere
on the order of five to ten instructions
concurrently, in memory going through
the pipeline of decode stage,
arithmetic stage, commit stage, and
all the other branching that happens.
So again, we probably reached the limit,
I don't think we can do
much more complicated.
And so the only thing we have to
us today is adding more cores.
And so we've seen that in
the recent years, right?
CPUs keep adding more and more cores.
And so now it's not uncommon for
your phone to have 16 cores.
I forget the exact number, but
I think it's on the order of 16.
And what's cool about it is,
some of the cores are high performance,
meaning they eat a lot of battery,
but they're super fast.
And some of the cores are slow,
but they sip on a battery, right?
And so with the CPU, what it
actually does, or the applications,
usually they run on the slow cores.
But then when they need to
do something complicated,
they switch over to the fast core and
do the complicated stuff and go back down.
Now, why does all this stuff matter for
JavaScript?
It matters because,
JavaScript has a design flaw, and
that is that it's single-threaded.
Which means,
we can only utilize one CPU at a time.
So you might be figuring, hey, let's
build, our app is slow, we don't care.
In the future the CPUs will be faster,
not really.
Yes, we have been making amazing
progress in terms of when you look at
a modern device and you say how many
teraflops of data it can process and
these amazing numbers.
But it's bit of a cheating because those
are numbers that are sum of all the cores
when all the cores
are pushing all at once.
But our single threaded JavaScript
can't take advantage of that.
Now there's ways to make a multi threaded
through service workers or other tricks.
But fundamentally,
we're in the single threaded world and so
we get to have one CPU.
So even if you have modern
computer with lots of cores and
whatever you get to use one, okay?
So, I kind of digress.
Have any questions at this point?
Yes.
>> JavaScript being single threaded,
is that a limitation of the JavaScript
engine that's being used or
is that like a more fundamental
>> It's a limitation of
the design really, right?
>> Of the design of the language itself?
>> I would say that all languages in their
nature are fundamentally single threaded,
right?
But many languages like for example,
Go have lots of primitives for
taking work and
pushing it on the other thread.
Now JavaScript does have a primitive,
which is a service worker, but
that primitive I wouldn't call
it a light weight primitive.
So in Go this go sub routines are
extremely cheap and and easy to work with.
In JavaScript, if you wanted to have
some work done on a service worker,
that's not cheap.
That's a lot of work in terms
of you as a developer to code,
but also a lot of work in terms
of the computer to execute,
of the fact that the service
worker doesn't share memory
with the main thread.
And so passing data between,
requires a serialization and
deserialization stuff, right?
You basically have to convert everything
to JSON, send it over as a string, and
the other side has to
convert everything back.
Now, there are new things in there, like
shared array buffers and other things that
are coming to JavaScript, but as of right
now, we don't really have good primitives.
Now, in the future, it's possible
that the language will evolve and
we'll get some primitives that
are useful for multiple CPUs.
But as of today, the way we are today,
JavaScript is single-threaded.
And again, I'm gonna say all languages
fundamentally are single-threaded,
it's just some languages have primitives
then make it easy to basically offload
work to other things.
>> Service workers
are native to the browser.
>> Yes.
>> So for like NodeJS,
there you have no really option for
another thread the, right?
>> Correct.
So NodeJS,
you have to spawn up separate isolates.
What are they call them?
>> Process.
>> Processes
>> Child.
>> Child's or whatever?
Yeah, those are separate threads, right?
So if you wanna do more work,
that's basically how it goes.
And the problem becomes, I don't know,
can you easily share streams
between child and parent?
Probably, it's tricky.
Okay, so let's go further.